# Models

Here are presented my experiments and the models I used.

## Basic RNN

As baseline, I tried a simple RNN model. Given a keyboard configuration, I try to predict the next one (this architecture is similar to the famous Char-RNN model). I formulate the prediction as a 88-binary classification problems: for each note on the keyboard, the network try to guess if the note is pressed or released. Because all classifications are not mutually exclusive (two keys can be pressed at the same time), I use a sigmoid cross entropy instead of softmax. For this first try, a lot of assumptions have been made on the song (only 4/4 for signature, quarter-note as maximum note resolution, no tempo changes or other difficulties that the model could not handle).

At first, I try to trained this model on 3 Scott Joplin songs. I choose Ragtime music for the first test because Ragtime songs have a really rigid and well defined structure, and the songs satisfied the assumptions made above. Each song is slitted in small parts and I randomly shuffle the parts between the songs so the network learn simultaneously different songs.

Because there is a high bias toward the negative class (key not pressed), I was a little afraid that the network would only predict empty songs. It doesn't seems to be the case. On the contrary, the network clearly overfit. When analysing the generated song, we see that the network has memorized entire parts of the original songs. This simple model was mainly a test to validate the fact that a small/medium sized network can encode some rhythmic and harmonic information. Of course, the database wasn't big enough to have a truly original artificial composer, but I'm quite impress by the capability of the network to learn by heart the song (blessed be the LSTM).

Usually the first notes are quite randoms but after few bars, the network stabilize over a part of the song he remember. When trying to generate sequences longer than the training ones, the network will simply loop over some parts and play it indefinitely. You can listen one of the generated song [here](midi/basic_rnn_joplin.mid). We can clearly recognize parts of [Rag Dance](https://youtu.be/tCrj1s1iVas).

There are some problems with this model. One being that even if trained conjointly, the predictions are done independently. Each one of the 88 classifier do not concert the other ones before doing its prediction so for instance the network's part which predict if a E4 should be played has no way to know if G2 is predicted at the same time or not (one way to solve this issue could be to use CRF, to take those phenomenons into account). Similary, the neural network don't care about the relative order of the notes in the input vector. We could invert the keys on the keyboard and the prediction would be the same. To improve our model, the model should have a way to know that the interval between C4 and C4# is the same that the one between A3 and A3#.

One other problem, maybe a little more technical, is that it's impossible for the network to correctly guess the first notes, because his internal state is empty: when the network see a new sequence, it start from a clear memory, like it had never seen anything before and will progressively build and encode what it 'sees' to its internal state. Because its internal state is reset at each iteration, during the first timestep the network has no knowledge on the song it his suppose to predict. A way this issue has been solved on some other model is to use another network called encoder which basically will compute the internal state to give at the network for its first step. Here, using a separate network for the encoding would be cheating, because it would make the network encoder dependent. The solution I tried is simply to ignore the first prediction (the first step are just here so the network can encode tonality, rhythm,...) and gradually penalize the mistakes more and more as we progress through the step. Basically what this change do is telling the network that it's less important to make a mistake during the first timestep when the structure of the song is completely unknown that at the end when it should have integrated the rhythm, tonality,...
